Add Map RFC (#104)
partiql/partiql-lang: RFCs/0000-RFC-Map-Type.md

- **Option B** — `MAP(k1, v1, k2, v2)`: Function-style with positional arguments. Concise for few entries but error-prone with many entries since keys and values alternate without visual grouping.
- **Option C** — `MAP([k1, k2], [v1, v2])`: Function-style taking a key array and a value array separately. Ensures equal counts but disconnects each key from its value, making it harder to read and maintain.

## Access / Lookup

Map entries are accessed using bracket notation with a key expression, reusing the existing path index syntax:

```sql
-- Given: my_map is MAP<STRING, INT> with entries 'x' -> 10, 'y' -> 20
my_map['x']          -- returns 10
my_map['z']          -- MISSING (permissive mode) or error (strict mode)
```

```sql
-- Given: id_map is MAP<INT, STRING>
id_map[42]           -- returns the value associated with key 42
```

A function alias `MAP_GET(map, key)` is also provided for clarity in complex expressions:

```sql
MAP_GET(my_map, 'x')  -- equivalent to my_map['x']
```

### When a key is not found:

- **Permissive mode**: returns `MISSING`
- **Strict mode**: raises an error (consistent with struct field access behavior)

### Key Type Matching in Lookup

> The key expression must match the declared key type of the MAP. If the types do not match, a type mismatch error is raised. An explicit cast is required to convert the key expression to the correct type.

Reviewer: Since PartiQL is a gradually typed language, I'd like to understand where the dynamic behavior comes in. Is `MAP<dynamic, dynamic>` allowed? I know that we support `BAG<dynamic>` and `LIST<dynamic>`. So, I'd like to understand the implications of the key type matching in these scenarios.

A good way to break it down would be:
1. At compile-time, is the type of the keys of a map able to be undefined?
2. At runtime, if the compile-time type was dynamic, are there allowed to be multiple types for the keys of a map?

```sql
-- Given: id_map is MAP<INT, STRING>
id_map[42]                 -- OK: key is INT

> id_map[42.0]               -- Error: key type mismatch (DECIMAL vs INT)

Reviewer: I would've imagined that type coercion would apply. Especially for a `MAP<DEC(21,3), STRING>`. If I called `my_map[a]` where `a` is a `DEC(21,2)`.

Reviewer 2: Agree, suggesting key lookup follows the same implicit coercion rules as equality comparison

Author: That make sense to apply coercion. However some coercion may be confusing, especially for date, datetime type, 

Map<DATE, any>
MAP<TIMESTAMP, any>

Timestamp '2010-01-01 10:00:00' will be casted to '2010-01-01' to look up. Not sure if this is expected by user.

id_map[CAST(42.0 AS INT)]  -- OK: explicit cast to INT
```

**Other consideration:** Key comparison in MAP lookup leverages the existing `DatumComparator` for equality checks. This ensures consistent comparison semantics across all key types without introducing a separate comparison mechanism for MAP keys.

## Grammar

```ebnf
<map type> ::= MAP '<' <data type> ',' <data type> '>'

<map constructor> ::= MAP '{' [ <map entry> ( ',' <map entry> )* ] '}'

<map entry> ::= <expr> ':' <expr>

<map access> ::= <expr> '[' <expr> ']'
```

# Constraints

## Key Constraints

Keys must support **equality comparison** for lookup and **uniqueness enforcement**. The key type K must be a **comparable scalar type**.

> **Allowed key types:**

Reviewer 3: I remember DuckDB does support [complex types as map keys](https://github.com/partiql/partiql-lang/pull/104/changes/e3aa4c180c88943b2176a337da312f1f802a070f#r3244551135), and maybe in spark sql as well. If we can make sure those complex types are also hashable, we can also support them

Reviewer 3: more over, with supporting complex types as map keys, the scribe can support better transcompile  to target sql dialect.

Author: Agreed, I will make that change

- All numeric types: `TINYINT`, `SMALLINT`, `INTEGER`, `BIGINT`, `DECIMAL`, `REAL`, `DOUBLE`
- All text types: `CHAR`, `VARCHAR`, `STRING`
- `BOOL`
- Date/time types: `DATE`, `TIME`, `TIMEZ`, `TIMESTAMP`, `TIMESTAMPZ`
- Interval types: `INTERVAL_YM`, `INTERVAL_DT`

> - `DYNAMIC` — allowed, but resolved type should be enforced to allow types.

Reviewer: Can you elaborate on "resolved type should be ..." ?

**Disallowed key types:**

> - `STRUCT`, `ROW` — lack well-defined equality semantics needed for reliable key behavior

Reviewer: At least until someone needs this sure. But, can you define how to this works in permissive and strict mode?

- `ARRAY`, `BAG` — lack well-defined equality semantics needed for reliable key behavior
- `MAP` — maps as keys are not meaningful

> **NULL as key:** Disallowed. Since `NULL = NULL` evaluates to `NULL` (not `TRUE`), a NULL key cannot be reliably looked up or deduplicated. Attempting to insert a NULL key raises an error.

Reviewer 2: Is MISSING as key allowed?

Author: Should not allow, but may need to be evaluated as MISSING.

> **NULL as key:** Disallowed. Since `NULL = NULL` evaluates to `NULL` (not `TRUE`), a NULL key cannot be reliably looked up or deduplicated. Attempting to insert a NULL key raises an error.

Reviewer: Presumably MISSING is also disallowed.

Author: yes

**Duplicate key policy:** Keys must be unique within a MAP. When a MAP is constructed with duplicate keys:

- **Strict mode**: raises an error
- **Permissive mode**: last-write-wins (the last value for a duplicate key is retained)

```sql
-- Strict mode:
MAP { 'a': 1, 'a': 2 }  -- Error: duplicate key 'a'

-- Permissive mode:
MAP { 'a': 1, 'a': 2 }  -- Results in MAP { 'a': 2 }
```

**Other consideration:** The duplicate key policy may be made configurable or left as implementation-defined behavior. This allows implementations to choose the policy that best fits their use case (e.g., an ingestion engine may prefer last-write-wins for performance, while a validation-oriented system may prefer strict error-on-duplicate).

## Value Constraints

The value type V can be **any** PartiQL type, including:

- Scalars (`INT`, `STRING`, `BOOL`, ...)
- Collections (`ARRAY`, `BAG`)
- Containers (`STRUCT`, `ROW`, `MAP`)

> - `DYNAMIC` (heterogeneous values — the unparameterized default)

Reviewer: There isn't an unparameterized default in the EBNF. Can you put one and show what that translates to?

Author: Not allowed anymore

NULL as value is allowed — e.g., `MAP { 'a': NULL, 'b': 42 }` is valid.

# Map Operations
## Type Check

```sql
my_map IS MAP         -- TRUE if my_map is a MAP value

> NULL IS MAP           -- FALSE

Reviewer 4: Isn't this traditionally UNKNOWN in RDBMSs? Should this evaluate to null?

Author: This should be null

Author: Missing  is MAP should be missing

> NULL IS MAP           -- FALSE

Reviewer: Wouldn't these return NULL/MISSING ?

Author: Will fix. it should be NULL/MISSING

```

No implicit STRUCT-to-MAP coercion is defined; conversion requires explicit `CAST`.

## EXCLUDE

`EXCLUDE` on MAP entries works by key expression:

```sql
SELECT * EXCLUDE my_map['unwanted_key'] FROM ...
```

## Null/Missing Semantics

| Expression | Result |
|---|---|
| `NULL IS MAP` | `FALSE` |
| `MISSING IS MAP` | `FALSE` |
| `SIZE(NULL)` | `NULL` |
| `MAP_GET(NULL, k)` | `NULL` |
| `MAP_GET(m, NULL)` | `NULL` (key not found) |
| `MAP_GET(m, missing_key)` | `MISSING` |

### Sample Data

The following examples use this common dataset — a `students` table where each row has a `name`, a `scores` map (subject to score), and a `tags` map (tag name to tag value):

``` partiql
{
  'students': <<
    {
      'name': 'Alice',
      'scores': MAP { 'math': 90, 'science': 85, 'english': 72 },
      'tags': MAP { 'status': 'active', 'priority': 'high' }
    },
    {
      'name': 'Bob',
      'scores': MAP { 'math': 75, 'science': 92 },
      'tags': MAP { 'status': 'active' }
    },
    {
      'name': 'Carol',
      'scores': MAP { 'math': 88, 'science': 79, 'english': 95 },
      'tags': MAP { 'status': 'inactive', 'priority': 'low' }
    }
  >>
}
```

## Filtering by Key/Value

> The `MAP` type does not support standard comparison operators like `<`, `>`. Equality works if two maps have the same keys and values.

Reviewer 5: It seems to me like equality can't work because maps may have values where equality is not well-defined, the same values which cannot be map keys.

Author: equality can work for most cases. But should highlight if Map value is present. it may not work.

SELECT *
FROM students
WHERE CONTAINS_KEY(tags, 'priority')
```

Result:
```
<<
  {
    'name': 'Alice',
    'scores': MAP { 'math': 90, 'science': 85, 'english': 72 },
    'tags': MAP { 'status': 'active', 'priority': 'high' }
  },
  {
    'name': 'Carol',
    'scores': MAP { 'math': 88, 'science': 79, 'english': 95 },
    'tags': MAP { 'status': 'inactive', 'priority': 'low' }
  }
>>
```

```sql
-- Filter with unpivot — only entries with score > 80.
-- UNPIVOT decomposes each student's scores MAP into (k, v) pairs.
-- The lateral join produces one row per map entry per student,
-- then WHERE filters to only entries where the score exceeds 80.
SELECT t.name, k as subject, v as score
FROM students AS t, UNPIVOT t.scores AS v AT k
WHERE v > 80
```

Result:
```
<<
  {
    'name': 'Alice',
    'subject': 'math',
    'score': 90
  },
  {
    'name': 'Alice',
    'subject': 'science',
    'score': 85
  },
  {
    'name': 'Bob',
    'subject': 'science',
    'score': 92
  },
  {
    'name': 'Carol',
    'subject': 'math',
    'score': 88
  },
  {
    'name': 'Carol',
    'subject': 'english',
    'score': 95
  }
>>
```

## Ordering by Key/Value

> The `MAP` type is not orderable. You cannot order by a column with `MAP` type. However, results can be ordered by accessing specific keys or by decomposing with UNPIVOT:

Reviewer: Given that the PartiQL Spec defines the grouping/ordering equality for every primitive type, I feel that it is mandatory for MAP to also be included in this. A map should be able to be sorted amongst other maps.

-- counts how many students have each subject in their scores.
SELECT k, COUNT(*) AS cnt
FROM students AS t, UNPIVOT t.scores AS v AT k
GROUP BY k
```

Result:
```
<<
  {
    'k': 'math',
    'cnt': 3
  },
  {
    'k': 'science',
    'cnt': 3
  },
  {
    'k': 'english',
    'cnt': 2
  }
>>
```

```sql
-- Sum values grouped by key.
-- Computes the total score per subject across all students
-- by summing the values (v) after grouping by key (k).
SELECT k, SUM(v) AS total
FROM students AS t, UNPIVOT t.scores AS v AT k
GROUP BY k
```

Result:
```
<<
  {
    'k': 'math',
    'total': 253
  },
  {
    'k': 'science',
    'total': 256
  },
  {
    'k': 'english',
    'total': 167
  }
>>
```

```sql
-- Aggregate by value — group students by their math score.
-- Accesses a specific key ('math') from each student's scores MAP,
-- then groups by that value to count how many students share the same score.
SELECT t.scores['math'] AS math_score, COUNT(*) AS cnt
FROM students AS t
GROUP BY t.scores['math']
```

Result:
```
<<
  {
    'math_score': 90,
    'cnt': 1
  },
  {
    'math_score': 75,
    'cnt': 1
  },
  {
    'math_score': 88,
    'cnt': 1
  }
>>
```

## Comparison Semantics

> MAP comparison is **unordered** (like STRUCT). Two maps are equal if they have the same set of key-value pairs, regardless of insertion order. Ordering of MAP-typed columns (e.g., for `ORDER BY`) is determined by comparing sorted entries.

Reviewer 5: What about the incomparable values which lack well-defined equality?

Author: I am thinking error will throw if lack well-defined equality.

- Start Date: 2026-05-11
- PartiQL Issue: [partiql/partiql-lang#8](https://github.com/partiql/partiql-lang/issues/8)
- RFC PR: https://github.com/partiql/partiql-lang/pull/104

# Summary

This RFC proposes the addition of a first-class `MAP<K, V>` type to PartiQL. A MAP is an unordered collection of key-value pairs where every key has the same type K, every value has the same type V, keys are unique, and access is by key expression. This fills the gap between ROW (fixed schema with known fields) and STRUCT (schemaless with string keys), providing a typed dictionary that enables static type reasoning by the planner.

# Motivation

PartiQL currently has two container types for key-value data: ROW and STRUCT. Neither adequately models the "typed dictionary" pattern common in real-world data:

- **ROW** models fixed schemas (SQL tuples) — the planner knows exactly which fields exist and their types at compile time, but fields are string-only and the schema is closed.

> - **STRUCT** models schemaless/semi-structured data (Ion structs) — keys are strings, values can be anything, duplicates are allowed, and the planner cannot reason about element types.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
STRUCT** models schemaless/semi-structured data (Ion structs) — keys are strings, values can be of any type, duplicate keys are allowed, and the planner cannot reason about element types statically.
```

Many systems (Hive, Iceberg, Trino, Spark SQL, Presto) support a MAP type for use cases such as:

- Configuration maps (e.g., `MAP<STRING, STRING>` of settings)
- Lookup tables (e.g., `MAP<INT, STRING>` of ID-to-name mappings)
- JSON objects with dynamic keys (e.g., metrics keyed by timestamp)
- Ion structs used as dictionaries where keys are known to be homogeneous

Adding MAP as a first-class type allows PartiQL to:

1. Close the gap between PartiQL and other major SQL systems.

> 2. Enable type-safe operations — the planner can infer key and value types statically.

Reviewer 6: Perhaps it's worthwhile to mention that this has a potential with performance gains in esp. in planning b/c of the known types.

Author: make sense.

```

The `MAP` keyword prefix disambiguates from STRUCT literal syntax (`{ ... }`).

**Alternatives considered:**

- **Option B** — `MAP(k1, v1, k2, v2)`: Function-style with positional arguments. Concise for few entries but error-prone with many entries since keys and values alternate without visual grouping.
- **Option C** — `MAP([k1, k2], [v1, v2])`: Function-style taking a key array and a value array separately. Ensures equal counts but disconnects each key from its value, making it harder to read and maintain.

## Access / Lookup

Map entries are accessed using bracket notation with a key expression, reusing the existing path index syntax:

```sql
-- Given: my_map is MAP<STRING, INT> with entries 'x' -> 10, 'y' -> 20
my_map['x']          -- returns 10
my_map['z']          -- MISSING (permissive mode) or error (strict mode)
```

```sql
-- Given: id_map is MAP<INT, STRING>
id_map[42]           -- returns the value associated with key 42
```

A function alias `MAP_GET(map, key)` is also provided for clarity in complex expressions:

```sql
MAP_GET(my_map, 'x')  -- equivalent to my_map['x']
```

### When a key is not found:

- **Permissive mode**: returns `MISSING`

> - **Strict mode**: raises an error (consistent with struct field access behavior)

Reviewer 6: For clarity we could have a brief description of the struct field access behavior.

Author: added a reference link to the struct field access behavior.

```sql
-- Given: id_map is MAP<INT, STRING>
id_map[42]                 -- OK: key is INT (exact match)
id_map[42.0]               -- OK: implicit cast DECIMAL → INT applied (compatible numeric type)
id_map['42']               -- Error: key type mismatch (STRING vs INT, incompatible)
id_map[CAST('42' AS INT)]  -- OK: explicit cast to INT
```

## Grammar

```ebnf
<map type> ::= MAP '<' <data type> ',' <data type> '>'

<map constructor> ::= MAP '{' [ <map entry> ( ',' <map entry> )* ] '}'

<map entry> ::= <expr> ':' <expr>

<map access> ::= <expr> '[' <expr> ']'
```

# Constraints

## Immutability

MAP values in PartiQL are **immutable**. Once constructed, a MAP cannot be modified in place. All operations that appear to modify a MAP (e.g., `MAP_PUT`, `MAP_REMOVE`, `||`) return a **new MAP value** — the original is unchanged. This is consistent with how all PartiQL values (scalars, arrays, structs) behave as immutable data within query evaluation.

## Key Constraints

> Keys must support **equality comparison** for lookup and **uniqueness enforcement**. The key type K must be a **comparable type** — a type that has well-defined equality semantics and is hashable. The exact definition of equality is implementation-dependent (e.g., whether string comparison is case-sensitive or uses a specific collation).

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
Keys must support **equality comparison** for lookup and **uniqueness enforcement**. The key type K must be a **comparable type** — a type that has well-defined equality semantics and is hashable. The exact definition of equality is implementation-defined (e.g., whether string comparison is case-sensitive or uses a specific collation).
```

**NULL as key:** Disallowed. Since `NULL = NULL` evaluates to `NULL` (not `TRUE`), a NULL key cannot be reliably looked up or deduplicated. Attempting to insert a NULL key raises an error.

**MISSING as key:** Disallowed. MISSING represents the absence of a value and cannot serve as a key. Attempting to insert a MISSING key raises an error. Accessing a map with a MISSING key expression resolves to `MISSING` (missing propagation).

**Duplicate key policy:** Keys must be unique within a MAP. When a MAP is constructed with duplicate keys:

- **Strict mode**: raises an error

> - **Permissive mode**: last-write-wins (the last value for a duplicate key is retained)

Reviewer 6: Have we considered this to also be implementation defined?

Author: yes, it should be implementation defined

GROUP BY k
```

Result:
```
<<
  {
    'k': 'math',
    'cnt': 3
  },
  {
    'k': 'science',
    'cnt': 3
  },
  {
    'k': 'english',
    'cnt': 2
  }
>>
```

```sql
-- Sum values grouped by key.
-- Computes the total score per subject across all students
-- by summing the values (v) after grouping by key (k).
SELECT k, SUM(v) AS total
FROM students AS t, UNPIVOT t.scores AS v AT k
GROUP BY k
```

Result:
```
<<
  {
    'k': 'math',
    'total': 253
  },
  {
    'k': 'science',
    'total': 256
  },
  {
    'k': 'english',
    'total': 167
  }
>>
```

```sql
-- Aggregate by value — group students by their math score.
-- Accesses a specific key ('math') from each student's scores MAP,
-- then groups by that value to count how many students share the same score.
SELECT t.scores['math'] AS math_score, COUNT(*) AS cnt
FROM students AS t
GROUP BY t.scores['math']
```

Result:
```
<<
  {
    'math_score': 90,
    'cnt': 1
  },
  {
    'math_score': 75,
    'cnt': 1
  },
  {
    'math_score': 88,
    'cnt': 1
  }
>>
```

## Comparison Semantics

MAP comparison semantics are **implementation-defined**. Implementations may choose to support equality, ordering, or both.

> **Equality:** If an implementation defines equality for MAP values, two maps are equal if and only if they contain the same set of key-value pairs, regardless of insertion order. When equality is defined, operations that depend on it are supported:

Reviewer 6: Could you please clarify:

If it is implementation-defined, they why are prescriptive of the equality semantics?

Author: the equality semantic is example. There are some operations which can be supported if equality semantic  is defined. let me rephrase.

- `=` and `<>` comparison between MAP values
- `GROUP BY` on a MAP-typed column
- `DISTINCT` on a MAP-typed column
- MAP values as join keys

> **Ordering:** If an implementation defines a comparison order for MAP values (e.g., by comparing sorted entries lexicographically), operations that depend on ordering are supported:

Reviewer 6: ditto

Author: same
